% Buddhist Economics
% E.F. Schumacher
% 1966

"Right Livelihood" is one of the requirements of the Buddha’s Noble
Eightfold Path. It is clear, therefore, that there must be such a
thing as Buddhist economics.

Buddhist countries have often stated that they wish to remain faithful
to their heritage. So Burma: "The New Burma sees no conflict between
religious values and economic progress. Spiritual health and material
well-being are not enemies: they are natural allies."[^1] Or: "We can
blend successfully the religious and spiritual values of our heritage
with the benefits of modern technology."[^2] Or: "We Burmans have a
sacred duty to conform both our dreams and our acts to our faith. This
we shall ever do."[^3]

All the same, such countries invariably assume that they can model
their economic development plans in accordance with modern economics,
and they call upon modern economists from so-called advanced countries
to advise them, to formulate the policies to be pursued, and to
construct the grand design for development, the Five-Year Plan or
whatever it may be called. No one seems to think that a Buddhist way
of life would call for Buddhist economics, just as the modern
materialist way of life has brought forth modern economics.

Economists themselves, like most specialists, normally suffer from a
kind of metaphysical blindness, assuming that theirs is a science of
absolute and invariable truths, without any presuppositions. Some go
as far as to claim that economic laws are as free from "metaphysics"
or "values" as the law of gravitation. We need not, however, get
involved in arguments of methodology. Instead, let us take some
fundamentals and see what they look like when viewed by a modern
economist and a Buddhist economist.

There is universal agreement that a fundamental source of wealth is
human labour. Now, the modern economist has been brought up to
consider "labour" or work as little more than a necessary evil. From
the point of view of the employer, it is in any case simply an item of
cost, to be reduced to a minimum if it can not be eliminated
altogether, say, by automation. From the point of view of the workman,
it is a "disutility"; to work is to make a sacrifice of one’s leisure
and comfort, and wages are a kind of compensation for the sacrifice.
Hence the ideal from the point of view of the employer is to have
output without employees, and the ideal from the point of view of the
employee is to have income without employment.

The consequences of these attitudes both in theory and in practice
are, of course, extremely far-reaching. If the ideal with regard to
work is to get rid of it, every method that "reduces the work load" is
a good thing. The most potent method, short of automation, is the
so-called "division of labour" and the classical example is the pin
factory eulogised in Adam Smith’s _Wealth of Nations_.[^4] Here it is not a
matter of ordinary specialisation, which mankind has practiced from
time immemorial, but of dividing up every complete process of
production into minute parts, so that the final product can be
produced at great speed without anyone having had to contribute more
than a totally insignificant and, in most cases, unskilled movement of
his limbs.

The Buddhist point of view takes the function of work to be at least
threefold: to give man a chance to utilise and develop his faculties;
to enable him to overcome his ego-centredness by joining with other
people in a common task; and to bring forth the goods and services
needed for a becoming existence. Again, the consequences that flow
from this view are endless. To organise work in such a manner that it
becomes meaningless, boring, stultifying, or nerve-racking for the
worker would be little short of criminal; it would indicate a greater
concern with goods than with people, an evil lack of compassion and a
soul-destroying degree of attachment to the most primitive side of
this worldly existence. Equally, to strive for leisure as an
alternative to work would be considered a complete misunderstanding of
one of the basic truths of human existence, namely that work and
leisure are complementary parts of the same living process and cannot
be separated without destroying the joy of work and the bliss of
leisure.

From the Buddhist point of view, there are therefore two types of
mechanisation which must be clearly distinguished: one that enhances a
man’s skill and power and one that turns the work of man over to a
mechanical slave, leaving man in a position of having to serve the
slave. How to tell the one from the other? "The craftsman himself,"
says Ananda Coomaraswamy, a man equally competent to talk about the
modern West as the ancient East, "can always, if allowed to, draw the
delicate distinction between the machine and the tool. The carpet loom
is a tool, a contrivance for holding warp threads at a stretch for the
pile to be woven round them by the craftsmen’s fingers; but the power
loom is a machine, and its significance as a destroyer of culture lies
in the fact that it does the essentially human part of the work."5 It
is clear, therefore, that Buddhist economics must be very different
from the economics of modern materialism, since the Buddhist sees the
essence of civilisation not in a multiplication of wants but in the
purification of human character. Character, at the same time, is
formed primarily by a man’s work. And work, properly conducted in
conditions of human dignity and freedom, blesses those who do it and
equally their products. The Indian philosopher and economist J. C.
Kumarappa sums the matter up as follows:

> If the nature of the work is properly appreciated and applied, it
> will stand in the same relation to the higher faculties as food is
> to the physical body. It nourishes and enlivens the higher man and
> urges him to produce the best he is capable of. It directs his free
> will along the proper course and disciplines the animal in him into
> progressive channels. It furnishes an excellent background for man
> to display his scale of values and develop his personality.[^6]

If a man has no chance of obtaining work he is in a desperate
position, not simply because he lacks an income but because he lacks
this nourishing and enlivening factor of disciplined work which
nothing can replace. A modern economist may engage in highly
sophisticated calculations on whether full employment "pays" or
whether it might be more "economic" to run an economy at less than
full employment so as to insure a greater mobility of labour, a better
stability of wages, and so forth. His fundamental criterion of success
is simply the total quantity of goods produced during a given period
of time. "If the marginal urgency of goods is low," says Professor
Galbraith in The Affluent Society, "then so is the urgency of
employing the last man or the last million men in the labour
force."[^7] And again: "If . . . we can afford some unemployment in
the interest of stability—a proposition, incidentally, of impeccably
conservative antecedents—then we can afford to give those who are
unemployed the goods that enable them to sustain their accustomed
standard of living."

From a Buddhist point of view, this is standing the truth on its head
by considering goods as more important than people and consumption as
more important than creative activity. It means shifting the emphasis
from the worker to the product of work, that is, from the human to the
subhuman, a surrender to the forces of evil. The very start of
Buddhist economic planning would be a planning for full employment,
and the primary purpose of this would in fact be employment for
everyone who needs an "outside" job: it would not be the maximisation
of employment nor the maximisation of production. Women, on the whole,
do not need an "outside" job, and the large-scale employment of women
in offices or factories would be considered a sign of serious economic
failure. In particular, to let mothers of young children work in
factories while the children run wild would be as uneconomic in the
eyes of a Buddhist economist as the employment of a skilled worker as
a soldier in the eyes of a modern economist.

While the materialist is mainly interested in goods, the Buddhist is
mainly interested in liberation. But Buddhism is "The Middle Way" and
therefore in no way antagonistic to physical well-being. It is not
wealth that stands in the way of liberation but the attachment to
wealth; not the enjoyment of pleasurable things but the craving for
them. The keynote of Buddhist economics, therefore, is simplicity and
non-violence. From an economist’s point of view, the marvel of the
Buddhist way of life is the utter rationality of its pattern—amazingly
small means leading to extraordinarily satisfactory results.

For the modern economist this is very difficult to understand. He is
used to measuring the "standard of living" by the amount of annual
consumption, assuming all the time that a man who consumes more is
"better off" than a man who consumes less. A Buddhist economist would
consider this approach excessively irrational: since consumption is
merely a means to human well-being, the aim should be to obtain the
maximum of well-being with the minimum of consumption. Thus, if the
purpose of clothing is a certain amount of temperature comfort and an
attractive appearance, the task is to attain this purpose with the
smallest possible effort, that is, with the smallest annual
destruction of cloth and with the help of designs that involve the
smallest possible input of toil. The less toil there is, the more time
and strength is left for artistic creativity. It would be highly
uneconomic, for instance, to go in for complicated tailoring, like the
modern West, when a much more beautiful effect can be achieved by the
skillful draping of uncut material. It would be the height of folly to
make material so that it should wear out quickly and the height of
barbarity to make anything ugly, shabby, or mean. What has just been
said about clothing applies equally to all other human requirements.
The ownership and the consumption of goods is a means to an end, and
Buddhist economics is the systematic study of how to attain given ends
with the minimum means.

Modern economics, on the other hand, considers consumption to be the
sole end and purpose of all economic activity, taking the factors of
production—and, labour, and capital—as the means. The former, in
short, tries to maximise human satisfactions by the optimal pattern of
consumption, while the latter tries to maximise consumption by the
optimal pattern of productive effort. It is easy to see that the
effort needed to sustain a way of life which seeks to attain the
optimal pattern of consumption is likely to be much smaller than the
effort needed to sustain a drive for maximum consumption. We need not
be surprised, therefore, that the pressure and strain of living is
very much less in say, Burma, than it is in the United States, in
spite of the fact that the amount of labour-saving machinery used in
the former country is only a minute fraction of the amount used in the
latter.

Simplicity and non-violence are obviously closely related. The optimal pattern of consumption, producing a high degree of human satisfaction by means of a relatively low rate of consumption, allows people to live without great pressure and strain and to fulfill the primary injunction of Buddhist teaching: "Cease to do evil; try to do good." As physical resources are everywhere limited, people satisfying their needs by means of a modest use of resources are obviously less likely to be at each other’s throats than people depending upon a high rate of use. Equally, people who live in highly self-sufficient local communities are less likely to get involved in large-scale violence than people whose existence depends on world-wide systems of trade.

From the point of view of Buddhist economics, therefore, production from local resources for local needs is the most rational way of economic life, while dependence on imports from afar and the consequent need to produce for export to unknown and distant peoples is highly uneconomic and justifiable only in exceptional cases and on a small scale. Just as the modern economist would admit that a high rate of consumption of transport services between a man’s home and his place of work signifies a misfortune and not a high standard of life, so the Buddhist would hold that to satisfy human wants from faraway sources rather than from sources nearby signifies failure rather than success. The former tends to take statistics showing an increase in the number of ton/miles per head of the population carried by a country’s transport system as proof of economic progress, while to the latter—the Buddhist economist—the same statistics would indicate a highly undesirable deterioration in the pattern of consumption.

Another striking difference between modern economics and Buddhist
economics arises over the use of natural resources. Bertrand de
Jouvenel, the eminent French political philosopher, has characterised
"Western man" in words which may be taken as a fair description of the
modern economist:

> He tends to count nothing as an expenditure, other than human
> effort; he does not seem to mind how much mineral matter he wastes
> and, far worse, how much living matter he destroys. He does not seem
> to realize at all that human life is a dependent part of an
> ecosystem of many different forms of life. As the world is ruled
> from towns where men are cut off from any form of life other than
> human, the feeling of belonging to an ecosystem is not revived. This
> results in a harsh and improvident treatment of things upon which we
> ultimately depend, such as water and trees.[^8]

The teaching of the Buddha, on the other hand, enjoins a reverent and
non-violent attitude not only to all sentient beings but also, with
great emphasis, to trees. Every follower of the Buddha ought to plant
a tree every few years and look after it until it is safely
established, and the Buddhist economist can demonstrate without
difficulty that the universal observation of this rule would result in
a high rate of genuine economic development independent of any foreign
aid. Much of the economic decay of southeast Asia (as of many other
parts of the world) is undoubtedly due to a heedless and shameful
neglect of trees.

Modern economics does not distinguish between renewable and
non-renewable materials, as its very method is to equalise and
quantify everything by means of a money price. Thus, taking various
alternative fuels, like coal, oil, wood, or water-power: the only
difference between them recognised by modern economics is relative
cost per equivalent unit. The cheapest is automatically the one to be
preferred, as to do otherwise would be irrational and "uneconomic."
From a Buddhist point of view, of course, this will not do; the
essential difference between non-renewable fuels like coal and oil on
the one hand and renewable fuels like wood and water-power on the
other cannot be simply overlooked. Non-renewable goods must be used
only if they are indispensable, and then only with the greatest care
and the most meticulous concern for conservation. To use them
heedlessly or extravagantly is an act of violence, and while complete
non-violence may not be attainable on this earth, there is nonetheless
an ineluctable duty on man to aim at the ideal of non-violence in all
he does.

Just as a modern European economist would not consider it a great
achievement if all European art treasures were sold to America at
attractive prices, so the Buddhist economist would insist that a
population basing its economic life on non-renewable fuels is living
parasitically, on capital instead of income. Such a way of life could
have no permanence and could therefore be justified only as a purely
temporary expedient. As the world’s resources of non-renewable
fuels—coal, oil, and natural gas—are exceedingly unevenly distributed
over the globe and undoubtedly limited in quantity, it is clear that
their exploitation at an ever-increasing rate is an act of violence
against nature which must almost inevitably lead to violence between
men.

This fact alone might give food for thought even to those people in
Buddhist countries who care nothing for the religious and spiritual
values of their heritage and ardently desire to embrace the
materialism of modern economics at the fastest possible speed. Before
they dismiss Buddhist economics as nothing better than a nostalgic
dream, they might wish to consider whether the path of economic
development outlined by modern economics is likely to lead them to
places where they really want to be. Towards the end of his courageous
book The Challenge of Man’s Future, Professor Harrison Brown of the
California Institute of Technology gives the following appraisal:

> Thus we see that, just as industrial society is fundamentally
> unstable and subject to reversion to agrarian existence, so within
> it the conditions which offer individual freedom are unstable in
> their ability to avoid the conditions which impose rigid
> organization and totalitarian control. Indeed, when we examine all
> the foreseeable difficulties which threaten the survival of
> industrial civilization, it is difficult to see how the achievement
> of stability and the maintenance of individual liberty can be made
> compatible.[^9]

Even if this were dismissed as a long-term view there is the immediate
question of whether "modernization," as currently practiced without
regard to religious and spiritual values, is actually producing
agreeable results. As far as the masses are concerned, the results
appear to be disastrous—a collapse of the rural economy, a rising tide
of unemployment in town and country, and the growth of a city
proletariat without nourishment for either body or soul.

It is in the light of both immediate experience and long term
prospects that the study of Buddhist economics could be recommended
even to those who believe that economic growth is more important than
any spiritual or religious values. For it is not a question of
choosing between "modern growth" and "traditional stagnation." It is a
question of finding the right path of development, the Middle Way
between materialist heedlessness and traditionalist immobility, in
short, of finding "Right Livelihood."

 
[^1]: The New Burma (Economic and Social Board, Government of the Union of Burma, 1954).
[^2]: _Ibid_.
[^3]: _Ibid_.
[^4]: _Wealth of Nations_ by Adam Smith
[^5]: _Art and Swadeshi_ by Ananda K. Coomaraswamy (Ganesh & Co., Madras).
[^6]: _Economy of Permanence_ by J. C. Kumarappa (Sarva-Seva Sangh Publication, Rajghat, Kashi, 4th ed., 1958).
[^7]: _The Affluent Society by John Kenneth Galbraith_ (Penguin Books Ltd., 1962).
[^8]: _A Philosophy of Indian Economic Development_ by Richard B. Gregg (Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, India, 1958).
[^9]: _The Challenge of Man’s Future_ by Harrison Brown (The Viking Press, New York, 1954).

